Dimensional Modelling:
Dimensional Modeling (DM) is a data structure technique optimized for data storage in a Data warehouse. The purpose of dimensional modeling is to optimize the database for faster retrieval of data.
The concept of Dimensional Modelling was developed by Ralph Kimball and consists of “fact” and “dimension” tables.

Elements of Dimensional Data Model:

Fact:
 Facts are the measurements/metrics or facts from your business process.

Dimension:
 Dimension provides the context surrounding a business process event. In simple terms, they give who, what, where  of a fact.

Attributes:
 The Attributes are the various characteristics of the dimension in dimensional data modeling.

Fact Table:
A fact table is a primary table in dimension modelling.

A Fact Table contains:
Measurements/facts
Foreign key to dimension table


Dimension Table:
A dimension table contains dimensions of a fact.
They are joined to fact table via a foreign key.
Dimension tables are de-normalized tables.
The Dimension Attributes are the various columns in a dimension table
Dimensions offers descriptive characteristics of the facts with the help of their attributes
No set limit set for given for number of dimensions
The dimension can also contain one or more hierarchical relationships


Steps of Dimensional Modelling:

The accuracy in creating your Dimensional modeling determines the success of your data warehouse implementation. Here are the steps to create Dimension Model

Identify Business Process

Identify Grain (level of detail):
Grain describes the level of detail for the business problem/solution. It is the process of identifying the lowest level of information for any table in your data warehouse. 

Identify Dimensions

Identify Facts

Build Schema:
A schema is nothing but the database structure (arrangement of tables).

Star Schema
The star schema architecture is easy to design. It is called a star schema because diagram resembles a star, with points radiating from a center. The center of the star consists of the fact table, and the points of the star is dimension tables.

The fact tables in a star schema which is third normal form whereas dimensional tables are de-normalized.

Snowflake Schema
The snowflake schema is an extension of the star schema. In a snowflake schema, each dimension are normalized and connected to more dimension tables.







